title: "IoT Investigations in The Fight Against Terrorism"
author: "Luckson"
date: "2019-11-07"
output: html_document

## Tag: [ IoT, terrorism, digital evidence, investigations, devices, cyber, internet, policing ]

## Introduction
While the many benefits of the Internet are self-evident. Technology is one of the strategic factors driving the increasing use of the Internet by terrorist organizations.  Terrorism is one of the most concerning and important areas of security for all national states at this juncture of world peace. IoT is a combination of various networking and computing technologies that herald a new age of data aggregation and ubiquitous connectivity among physical objects which translate to technologies that enable closer interactions between humans and information systems. This paper is meant to shed more light on the need not to ignore the Internet of Things as a paradigm in which everyday devices are connected to the internet and share information with other devices which then creates a reality that terrorists can be able to influence the physical world from the comfort of their homes necessitating the need to have digital forensic investigations as part of terrorism investigation teams across the world.

## Evidence from IoT in Terrorism
Digital devices are fast emerging as important sources of evidence. Many people are not aware, for example, what kind of digital evidence is in a computer, cell phone, and drones. New York Times reports that in 2017, the police thwarted 47 terrorist plots, seven more than the previous year meaning that police agencies are fast adapting to the threat of terrorism and other crimes, using data and emerging technologies to deter attacks. Traditionally, law enforcement by nature is reactive and always responding to the problem but new technology is changing everything, according to Anita Hazenberg, Director of the Innovation Centre at the Interpol Global Complex for Innovation in Singapore. Everyday appliances can shed light on clues that may have been missed as they are connected and store data. A smart lamp, for example, can provide evidence on when it was used and how long for, giving digital investigators a more detailed picture of a crime scene.
Better technology, communications, weapons, and modes of transportation are at terrorists' disposal with many terrorism cases being now proven in court through forensic evidence. The expected trend and notion is terrorists are unlikely to cooperate with authorities after being arrested. While many digital devices like desktop and laptop computers and smart phones are already connected to the internet, the core idea of the IoT expands this capability for networking to practically every object which we use: from tiles on the pavement to cars on the street, and from the kitchen sink and smoke detector in our houses right down to the lowly toothbrush and hair comb. Firms like Morgan Stanley and Huawei state that we will see 75 billion and 100 billion networked devices by 2020 and 2025. Terrorists are now able to profoundly impact the physical world in other countries, without actually getting up from their chair in front of the computer.
As a way of increasing effectiveness, proactive police agencies like the Korean National Police Agency have managed to create innovative methods of responding to the need to standardize domestic law enforcement practices relating to digital forensics by developing and implementing two manuals, the Standard Guidelines for Handling Digital Evidence and the Digital Forensics Technical Manual as a way to take advantage of new technology in policing. 
The United States Department of Homeland Security has also developed a valuable guide called, Best practices for seizing electronic evidence outlining the steps to preserve evidence in connection with criminal investigations involving computing devices meant for officers who first arrive to seize devices of the suspect (first responders).
•	Do not use the computer or attempt to search for evidence 
•	If the computer is connected to a network, unplug the power source to the router or modem 
•	Prior to moving any evidence, photograph the computer as found, including the front and back, as well as any cords or connected devices and the surrounding area 
•	If the computer is off, do not turn it on 
•	If the computer is on and something is displayed on the monitor, photograph the screen 
•	If the computer is on and the screen is blank, move the mouse or press the space bar (this will display the active image on the screen); after the image appears, photograph the screen 
•	For desktop computers, unplug the power cord from back of the computer tower 
•	For laptop computers, unplug the power cord; if the laptop does not shut down, locate and remove the battery pack the battery is commonly placed on the bottom, and there is usually a button or switch that allows for its removal; once the battery is removed, do not return it to or store it in the laptop this will prevent the accidental start-up of the laptop
•	Diagram and label cords to later identify connected devices 
•	Disconnect all cords and devices from the tower or laptop 
•	Package and transport components (including the router and modem, if present) as fragile cargo  
•	Where permitted pursuant to the terms of any applicable search warrant, seize any additional storage media 
•	Keep all media, including the tower, away from magnets, radio transmitters and other potentially damaging elements 
•	Document all steps involved in the seizure of a computer and its components.

## Investigations Approach to IoT in Terrorism
In terrorism cases criminal investigations and prosecutions are intelligence-based, at least in the early stages and involve sensitive information that is closely held and protected. Effective investigations relating to Internet activity rely on a combination of traditional investigative methods, knowledge of the tools available to conduct illicit activity via the Internet. Investigators can forensically examine the content of the computers used by a suspected terrorist and find out that he\she conducted research on matters relating to the commission of terrorist acts, for example products capable of being used to make explosives and incendiary devices, identifying possible targets and tracking the activities of a company which used ammonium nitrate.
While the admissibility of evidence is ultimately a question of law and court processes, investigators should be familiar with the legal and procedural requirements to establish admissibility for the purposes of both domestic and international investigations. The procedures used in gathering, preserving and analyzing digital evidence must ensure that a clear chain of custody has been maintained from the time it was first secured, so that it could not have been tampered with from the moment of its seizure until its final production in court.
Tracing an IP address is one of the key steps in investigations into terrorist use of the Internet as it identifies the specific network and device being used to access the Internet. Digital Forensic Investigators have available to them a range of specialized utilities and hardware such as Ping and Trace-route which may be integrated into the operating system of a device under investigation for example Zia Ul Haq, who was arrested on 3 May 2010 alleged member of Lashker e Taiba, which is a Pakistan-based armed group fighting against Indian control in Kashmi. E-mail communications between him and his handler were obtained from the Internet-service providers and their content was examined. The cybercafé computers that were used by the offender were forensically analyzed and his signature in the guests’ register of hotel where he stayed while he was in Delhi forensically matched. 
Other programs that may be used, subject to domestic laws and regulations regarding access to the device and interception of communications, include Trojan Horses or Remote Administration Trojans (RATs), which may be introduced covertly into a computer system to collect information or to enable remote access over the compromised machine.
Mobile devices such as smart phones and personal digital assistants undergo specialist analysis as soon as they are seized owing to the fragile nature of digital evidence. It is advisable to perform any examinations on a copy of the original evidence, in order to preserve the integrity of the original source data which may be created with the use of specific forensic tools, such as Guidance Software’s EnCase or Forensic Tool Kit.

## Common Investigation Headaches of IoT
Privacy is a human rights issue. Technological advances like IoT, which depend on the connection of just about everything, have major privacy concerns which then results in talks of surveillance inhibiting the free functioning of a vibrant civil society or the vulnerability of digital communications to surveillance.
Cooperation from Internet Services Provider (ISP) which is a request to the ISP to preserve data relevant to the criminal investigation, pending fulfillment of the necessary steps to secure the data for evidentiary purposes is not easy as these companies try to always protect the data of their clients avoiding being sued for infringement of agreements and rights.
Complexities related to the location, retention, seizure and production of Internet-related data makes timely and effective international cooperation between law enforcement and intelligence agencies an increasingly difficult factor in the successful investigation and prosecution of many terrorism cases.
The difficulties in implementation, adoption and consolidation of instruments against terrorism amongst nations, which comprise of international conventions and protocols and relevant resolutions of the Security Council, that contain comprehensive mechanisms for international cooperation in criminal proceedings related to terrorism. These instruments make provision for extradition, mutual legal assistance, transfer of criminal proceedings and convicted persons, reciprocal enforcement of judgments, freezing and seizure of assets and exchange of information between law enforcement agencies.

## Conclusion
Governments need to prepare themselves for increasingly grey areas from police stations to digital forensic labs, then to create new guidelines, redefine and adapt to the changing face of law enforcement. Public-private partnerships in connection with the regulation of the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes would be beneficial. Similar initiatives have been successfully developed with respect to other areas of counter-terrorism, and to combat cybercrime generally. These initiatives provide a forum for formal and informal dialogue between counterparts from the public and private sectors, and also support activities such as joint training programmes which may assist in breaking down communication barriers and further enhancing trust, understanding and the development of harmonized practices between participating partnership members.

## References
http://ebooks.iospress.nl/volume/terrorists-use-of-the-internet-assessment-and-response
https://govinsider.asia/security/exclusive-how-interpol-is-battling-terrorism/
file:///C:/Users/Zvirikuzhe%20L%20T/Downloads/Use_of_the_internet_for_terrorist_purposes.pd
https://www.unodc.org/documents/frontpage/Use_of_Internet_for_Terrorist_Purposes.pdf
